                                        
    
    
                                PIT FIEND LIVES
    
    
                    Rules for PIT FIEND ADVENTURES VOLUME ][
    
                                RELEASE VERSION
    
    Introduction:  
    
    Well folks here is the documentation for Pit Fiend's Adventures Volume 
    2.  This game is highly complex and will take many calls to complete 
    if playing via modem....  It is not for the person who plays to kill 
    things and destroy, rather for those who like to use their mind to 
    solve puzzles...  You are warned.
    
    The game is very detailed and it is important for you to read the 
    rules so that you may completely understand what is going on!
    
    
    The Story Line:
    
    In the world of Californica there lived the mightiest wizard that ever 
    lived.... Loran the Mighty.  He was an evil wizard of great power and 
    used his power for wrong doing.  His plots were diabolical and 
    eventually he was strong enough to summon the evilest of demons, the 
    Pit Fiend... together they attempted to take over the lands of 
    Californica.  
    
    Luckily there was a king, King Lagor who led the attacks against the 
    two most evilest forces in all of time.  His attacks proved successful 
    and was able to corner them in a dungeon that was mighty and twisted.  
    Few survived the horrors inside and only a few were able to reach the 
    end to kill Loran... 
    
    But Pit Fiend was able to escape and fled the battle that ensued.  
    Hurt and without a wife he fled to a place that only a shattered diary 
    tells about...
    
                     The Diary told me Yolamdar, the Hermit
    
    I had went into the hills of *@$&()!)1*() hoping for some serentity 
    from the world's toils... I had been giving access to go into these 
    hills due to my good works in society... I merely needed a chance to 
    get in tune with the spritual order, when something bizzarre happened.
    
    I was sitting near a chunk of rock near **@#)@*@#* when a loud crash 
    of thunder came across the sky and lightning shreaked.  I immediately 
    came out of my trance of deep meditation as the rain fell.  I gazed 
    upon my surroundings and saw a large black shape falling from the 
    sky...  I stood up and took cover behind a large rock.
    
                                    Page -1-
    The shape took form as it approached and suddenly it came within 100 
    feet of the outcropping of rock known only as @#*&@($&#@.  It landed 
    and from my travels I noticed that it was the mighty Pit Fiend with 
    demon that has been remuored to be immortal, Mojave the Phoenix bird!  
    
    &*(#$*(& he chanted some words that were unrecognizable to me and 
    entered the &(*#@$(*@()#(@*#(@#*(*@( 
    
    As it entered it turned into a man and Mojave waited outside.  The Pit 
    Fiend yelled something at the mighty bird and Mojave took back into 
    the sky....  It had begun to rain much harder now and the entrance to 
    the cave closed.
    
    Shivering with cold and fright I hid there and waited, wondering if it 
    would be safe to leave.  Mojave, could spot me from anywhere and he 
    could be back at any moment.... so I stayed...
    
    It wasn't till two days later that he returned, carrying with him a 
    new and most evil bandit... whose ways are quite comparable to those 
    of Pit Fiend's.  Xevior, the renegade Dwarf.  Rumors of his evils are 
    spread throughout the realm.
    
    Xevior entered the outcropping and Mojave took back to the sky and 
    headed eastward... that was the last I saw of him.
    
    It was three days later when I finally managed the courage to leave 
    the holy place of her *(&@#*($*&*&()@()*($()* but during that time I 
    heard chanting, female screams, and the storm did not let up until the 
    chanting had ceased... whatever it was, the duo had done I do not 
    know, but their was something amiss.....
    
    
    That piece of journal had shown up on a raiding dwarven captains body, 
    no one knows what happened to Yolamdar or his bird Tesar...  To this 
    day, this piece of journal has been circulated around the lands and is 
    of particular interest in Scottsville, the new guard of the land!
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
                                    Page -2-
                            CREDITS AND THANK YOU'S
    
    Game Concept and Design:  Pit Fiend
    IBM WWIV Programming:  Pit Fiend and Lukas
    Documentation:  Pit Fiend
    Dungeon Creation:  Pit Fiend and Lukas
    World Creation:  Pit Fiend
    IBM DOS Version:  Pit Fiend and Lukas (available Aug 90)
    Language Used:  Turbo Pascal 3.0
    Beta Testing Boards:  After Midnite, A Touch of Mugwort, The Game 
    Syndicate, Castle Kzin, Hz Castle, Mindcraft.
    Ansi Screens:  Pit Fiend and Lukas
    Special Thanks to the Following Folks:
    
    Ali and Jim:  Without whose Expertise and Insight This Game would not 
    have been made possible.
    
    Dan R.  :  Special thanks for the mods, support, and help with some of 
    the coding.
    
    Brian A. (The Big B.A.) hey dude thanks for letting me use your name 
    (Xevior), you can find his name on his bowling ball!  Score another 
    200+ game!
    
    Mr. Goodwrench, hey dude next time backup the dungeon files you had 
    for me before a hard drive crash!
    
    Iron Horse:  A very special thanks for the suggestions and all the 
    HOURS you put into beta Testing.... On his board, Hz Castle.  Without 
    whose support and patience this game would not have been made 
    possible.
    
    Dragonmaster:  An Extra special thanks for this guy who played this 
    game like crazy... even at 1200!!!! Damn what patience... anyhow this 
    guy uncovered a lot of bugs and ran one of the most powerful 
    characters I had seen!  Thanks for all the help, I owe ya one!
    
    The Cracker:  Hey man, great job with the beta testing... quite a 
    powerful fighter there.... you found a lot of killer bugs too... Great 
    Work and thanks goes out to this Amiga Player.
    
    Marauder:  Thanks for the camping Mod, should help out the early 
    players... thanks!
    
    Awesome One and Night Raven:  You guys disappeared for a while... 
    anyhow got you guys into the game.  Great work and thanks for the 
    support!
    
    Tanis:  A late starter but nonetheless a dude who helped checked out 
    the game!
    
    
    Blith:  (Spell it right) hey dude thanks for letting me use your board 
    to beta it.... not too much response this time though... but thanks 
    nonetheless.
    
    
                                    The Land
    
    The lands of Californica is troubled, dwarved marauding through the 
    land is common place and Mojave has been harassing shipping.  It is up 
    to a small group of adventurers to bring an end to this while the 
    knights of Scottsville attempt to protect the various cities.
    
    The Cities:
    
    Malago's Cove:  This large thriving sea port is the starting port of 
    the adventure.  Located on an island, this place makes its living from 
    hunting, farming, and fishing.  It is a hot bed for rumors and is well 
    stocked with standard equipment for adventurers.
    
    Riverside:  The Elven Vale of the island.  This small town has been 
    plaqued by attacks, spurned by Xevior.  Much information and magic 
    items can be purchased or found there!
    
    Torrents:  This sea town is a busy trading spot, although somewhat 
    hindered by the Kobolds on the island, they are well stocked with 
    information and have a historian there!  It is also well stocked with 
    people.
    
    Carmel:  This halfling shire is busy and has a small population.  They 
    are well known for their tea and friendly attitude towards strangers, 
    a happy folk.
    
    Scottsville:  The Knights of Scottsville live here and defend the 
    honor of Lady Lynda.  A beautiful and most honorable knight.  She 
    fought evil in the darkest of ages.  Scottsville also is well stocked 
    with priestess's of Lady Lynda and offers very magical weapons and 
    armor.. but at a price.... the holy ones live here.
    
    Apple Valley:  A druidical place where they grow Apples and Fresh 
    Fruit for the world.  This place is far to the north of Malago's Cove.
    
    
    Palm Springs:  A place of relaxation.  Has many legends since a local 
    history college is located nearby.   Much adventure for those willing 
    to risk their lives in the desert.
    
    
    
    
    
                                    Page -3-
    Terrain in the Land
    
    In the land of Californica there are many different types of terrain, 
    a brief description follows:
    
    Clear
    Description:  Blank Space
    Effects:  No movement hinderence.
    
    Forest:
    Description:  Tree, green
    Effects:  Costs an additional movement point to enter, very good for 
    hunting.
    
    Mountain
    Description:  A triangle, 
    Effects:  These slow your movement by up to 25 points, depending if 
    you find a path through it!  Mountains are typically not good to hunt 
    in!
    
    River
    Description:  Blue splotch.
    Effects:  These slow your movement by 25 points unless you have a ring 
    of Water Walking.  There are completely crossable and are very good to 
    hunt in.
    
    Bridge
    Description:  A blinking red 'B'
    Effects:  Due to the evil in the lands, trolls often guard these 
    bridges and most be either bribed off or fought, they are tough so 
    beware!
    
    City
    Description:  A blinking red 'C'
    Effects:  These are enterable if you wish.  See city section.
    
    Beach/Desert
    Description:  A Yellow splotch
    Effects:  Movement like a forest but makes you consume more food/water 
    when you are on them.  Hunting is very poor here.
    
    Border/Coastline
    Description:  Purple lines
    Effects:  Un-crossable.
    
    
    Movement:
    
    You move your character through the lands with your numeric keypad.  
    Use '8' to move north, '4' to move west, '6' to move east, and '2' to 
    mvoe south.  If the movement is too slow you may opt to switch to fast 
    mode by hitting 'F' while outdoors.  This removes the color from the 
    view and makes movement faster!  It is highly recommended for 1200 bps 
    and some 2400 bps.  Not recommended for 9600 or higher users.
    
                                    Page -4-
                          Other Commands for Outdoors
    
    'A':  automap, this key allows you to view what you have explored 
    already.  The game automatically updates the map for you.  Once you 
    quit or move to a new section of a map the auto-map is gone!  
    
    'C':  Camp, this will restore all your hitpoints and magic points but 
    there is a very good chance (25%) of a wandering encounter.  It is 
    modified by Luck.
    
    'F':  Fast-Mode, see above section.
    
    'H':  Hunt, this allows characters to hunt for food, but at a high 
    price of movement points and the chances are depend upon the current 
    location of the character.  See terrain for recommendation on where to 
    hunt.  Elves are also very skilled at hunting!
    
    'I':  Inspect, this command allows you to inspect a location near you 
    or one that you are standing on.  Hit the direciton you wish to check-
    out or '5' if you are standing on it.  
    
    'Q':  Quit and Save, this saves your character and sets your movement 
    points to zero.  You will be prompted with a message of:
    
    'Reminders for Next Time (25 chars)?:'
    
    this allows you to write a little message to yourself reminding what 
    you were doing when you quit (in case you forget).  This message will 
    pop up when you restart the game.
    
    'R':  Ring use... if applicable you will be able to use a ring at this 
    time.  Combat rings cannot be used in non-combat situations.  Rings of 
    Protection and Regenerations are also non-useable.
    
    'S':  Save Character, recommended to be used every 100 moves or 
    whenever you win a big combat.  All potions that are in effect on one 
    of your stats will be removed when you do a save.
    
    'U':  Use Potion, allows you to use a potion.  All potions are usable 
    anywhere except X-ray vision, which is only usable in Dungeons.
    
    'V':  View Character, allows you to view your character, also 
    refreshes  the screen in case of line noise.
    
    'X':  X-ray, use the potion of X-ray vision, the ring, or a Rogue's 
    natural ability to x-ray doors.  X-ray vision allow you to see what is 
    in a room (monster-wise) prior to entering it.  Handy if you are not a 
    strong fighter or are seriously wounded.
    
    'Z':  Special Character Functions, allows you to destroy your 
    character or quit without saving, upon your choice.
    
                                    Page -5-
    
                                    Dungeons
    
    Dungeons are the mainstay of evil.  All the commands listed above are 
    operatable in the dungeons.  Some notes about dungeons follow:
    
    Entering:  When you find a dungeon (an upsidedown 'U', blinking red) 
    you may be prompted with a request to enter three words.  You MUST 
    have these three words to enter!  
    
    These words can be found from villages, not another user!  If you get 
    the words from say your friend it will not allow you to enter!  Your 
    friend though could tell you who to talk to in cities to earn the 
    words.  Some dungeons though that aren't as important do not require 
    words to enter and you will not be prompted to enter any if this is 
    the case.  If you fail to enter the correct words or do not have the 
    necessary toggle to enter it you will be attacked!
    
    Movement Notes:
    
    Some dungeons are partially flooded and the streams or muck-pools 
    require an additional movement point to enter.  
    
    Unlike Pit Fiend Volume I, rooms are walk throughs.  Meaning once you 
    defeat the monster you can enter the room and possibly find another 
    door leading elsewhere, or treasure.  Also, once a room is cleared of 
    monsters it remains cleared!  Forever!  You can use it as a resting 
    spot.
    
    Some special notes on terrain in dungeons:
    
    '$' :  Treasure or a special event.
    These are like the signs in Pit Fiend Volume I and sometimes contain 
    treasure.  Gold, potions, and food can be found with these!  They 
    disappear once read or used.  If you quit and save and call back later 
    the game knows that you have already gotten treasure there (if any) 
    and will not give you more.
    
    'D' :  doors
    These contain rooms with monsters in them.  Remember, once you defeat 
    monsters in a certain room they are gone forever.
    
    Guard Posts,
    These are not shown of the screen, but contain monsters who are 
    guarding an area.  They will be there forever and can be refought in 
    some circumstances.
    
    Wandering Monsters
    
    Wandering Monsters in dungeons are assigned by your level, you fight 
    something that pertains to your level, but in the outdoors it is 
    determined by your wilderness map... so if you get killed a lot on a 
    certain map, you should probably not be there.
    
    
                                    Page -6-
    More Movement Figures
    
    On the right hand side of your screen you will find information 
    pertaining to your hit point status, magic point status, your location 
    in x and y terms.  As well as food and armor class.  
    
    HPS:  Hit points current/Hit Points Maximum
    MPS:  Magic Points current/Magic Points Maximum
    LOX:  Location in X terms
    LOY:  Location in Y terms (uesd mainly for teleportation rings)
    AC :  Armor class (the higher the better)
    FOD:  Food, the more the better, 99 is the maximum.
    ACT:  Your Current action that you just did.
    
    Below that you will find the name of the dungeon you are in currently 
    if you are in a dungeon.
    
    
                                      Food
    
    Rougly every 100 moves, you will eat one ration of food.  If you run 
    out your game for that call is over.  Also you will loose hit points.  
    Be sure you have plenty of food, otherwise your game will be limited 
    to 100 moves per call, instead of 255.
    
    
                                     Cities
    
    Cities are of great importance, below is a description of everything 
    you can do in a city.
    
    'A' : arena of death, 
    
    Here you can fight other users, send e-mail to ANY playing character 
    (regardless of city location), or spy on a character.
    
    'B' :  Boating
    If the city is a port, you can save great amounts of time by traveling 
    on a boat.  Some cities boating activities are limited by monsters or 
    toggles....
    
    'C' :  Chat with people
    
    This is probably THE MOST important part of the city.  When you hit 
    'C' the local community will pop up and you will be able to talk to 
    any one of them.  It is VERY important that you write down what they 
    have to say if it is important.  Sometimes they like to ramble on 
    about weird stuff, but be sure you talk to them.
    
                                    Page -7-
    When you talk to them it is always VERY wise to 'GREET' them first by 
    hitting G.  Most of the time they will give you a clue as to what they 
    want to talk about like for instance:
    
    Tobias
    (D)escription (G)reet  (I)nquiry  (L)eave person.
    
    When you first choose a person to talk to there name will pop up and a 
    brief description of what they look like and what they are doing.  To 
    see it again hit "D" and it will come back up for you to examine.
    
    When you Greet a person by hitting 'G' you are basically saying 
    "HELLO, WHAT'S UP", usually they will respong something like this:
    
    "GREETINGS, WELCOME TO "HELLTOWN"!"
    
    You will notice that Helltown is in quotes.  So you hit 'I' for 
    inquiry and type:  HELLTOWN  (note do not put question marks or quotes 
    around it and spelling must be correct!!!!)  Tobias in this case may 
    say:
    
    "Yes it is quite hot here, but I know of a dungeon, called "DOOM"."
    
    Again you hit 'I' and type DOOM.  He may then give you words or tell 
    you more about it etc...  (note Tobias in not the game and most 
    converations are more realistic than this!)
    
    When you are done with that person hit 'L' to say "Good-Bye", most of 
    the time they will say good-bye back, often times they may give a clue 
    in their good-bye statement which means you have to reenter 
    conversation with him.  Most towns contain roughly 10 or so 
    conversations.
    
    'F'ast Mode, you can set the outdoor fastmode in towns in you want to, 
    but it has NO effect in towns.
    
    'G' General Store
    Here you can buy food, weapons, and armor.  It is very wise to buy 
    both a melee weapon and a missile weapon.
    
    'L' leave town, lets you outside!
    
    'P' potion store... allows you to buy potions, see potion section for 
    a description on potions
    
    'Q' quit and save (as movement)
    
    'R' Ring store as potions but see ring section for description of 
    rings.
    
    'S' save character.  Save your character without quitting.
    
    'T' tavern, gamble your hard earned money or hear some decent rumors.
                                    Page -8-
    'V' View Character as movement
    
    'Y' Your Guardian Angel, you will get to here some helpful hints and 
    recommendations as to where and what to do.  Written by myself or 
    Lukas these are of outmost importance to read.
    
    'Z' Char. Function, as in movement.
    
    Towns have various prices depending upon their price modification.  
    The more expensive a town is the more magical their weapons are as 
    well.
    
                                    Boating
    
    Boating is rather simple.  Depending upon which city you are in you 
    can sail to other cities.  Sometimes boating is restricted because of 
    Mojave or other incidents.  You must remove the obstacle prior to 
    sailing.
    
    Boating is always safe and usually fairly expensive in terms of gold 
    pieces, but it sure beats walking!  When you sail you will loose all 
    your moves for that call and will be outside the city you were 
    destined to arrive in!
    
                                 General Store
    
    The General Store is the mainstay of building up an aresenal of 
    weapons.  Whether magical or not, these weapons determine whether you 
    will survive long in Pit Fiend ][.  
    
    Armor:  The armor store is where you purchase armor.  Be sure to sell 
    any existing armor you might have prior to purchasing a different 
    suit.  The higher the armor defense rating the better it is!  Also, 
    usually, their is a movement hinderence.  Meaning you get less moves 
    per day if you are wearing bulky armor.  Choose wisely.
    
    Food:  This is where you buy food.  The maximum amount of food you can 
    buy is 99.
    
    Magic Staves:  Only elves and magic users are allowed to purchase 
    anything here.  The more damage a particular staff can do the better 
    it is (and more expensive) and the less likely it will succeed in 
    combat!  Hit 'I' for information if you need to learn more about a 
    particular staff.
    
    
    
    
    
                                    Page -9-
    Weapons:  Ahh.... the most important factor in the game.  The higher 
    the damage the better it is.  There are two different kinds of 
    weapons:  Melee and Missile.   Melee weapons are used in close combat 
    and are put in your character's melee slot.  You also have a slot for 
    missile weapons.
    
    Missile weapons are used in missile combat, when monsters are not in 
    hand to hand.  They usually have multiple attacks per turn.  That is 
    an important factor.
    
    Magic Bonuses with weapons:  Magic bonuses, such as +1 allow you more 
    damage each strike as well as a better chance of hitting.  Your damage 
    is computed by going through a loop for each plus; i.e. a +1 Long 
    Sword with a maximum damage of 10 can do 2-20 points of damage.  It is 
    NOT neccessarily double damage though.
    
    Be sure to sell any equipment such as weapons BEFORE purchasing a new 
    one, the new weapon overwrites your slot, thus erasing the previous 
    weapon.  Hit "V" in the main area to determine if you indeed have a 
    weapon PRIOR to buying a new one.
    
                                   Leave City
    
    This will take you out of the city.  Be sure you have purchased 
    weapons and armor prior to leaving.  
    
                                    Potions
    
    There are nine different kinds of Potions:
    
    Healing and Spell Point Restoration:  These potions can be used at any 
    time allowing you to restore lost hit points or spell points.  Amount 
    restored depends upon your level.
    
    Potions of Luck, Strength, Dexterity mod your stats until you save or 
    quit your game.  Amount gained varies.  A stat of 20 or higher is 
    considered good and special benefits are gained.
    
    Potion of Speed:  This potion allows you an additional attack per 
    combat round.  Multiple uses can increase your number of attacks to 
    255 if you have 255 potions.
    
    Potion of Time Distortion:  Allows you 50 extra moves for that call 
    only.  Can only be used once per call, regardless of amount possessed!
    
                                 Quit and Save
    
    Save will remove all effects of potions.  Quit will quit you back to 
    the BBS, saving your character.  Enter a reminder to yourself so you 
    know what you are doing next time you play.
                                   Page -10-
                                     Rings
    
    Goodie  Magic Items!  There are some 19 rings in the game.  A brief 
    description follows:
    
    Rings of Protection:  There are five of these things, varying power!  
    For each magical plus you granted one better armor class rating.  It 
    also modifies your saving throws against spells and traps!
    
    Rings of Shocking, Ice Chill, Sharp Pains, and Skull Crusher are all 
    offensive rings in that they do damage in combat.  ANY class can use 
    these.  They are limited to 10 charges and once all used they are 
    worthless.  They are 100% successful.
    
    Rings of Regeneration:  There are two of these, the standard one heals 
    you 1 hit point if you are wounded in outdoor mode.  Every square you 
    move into it will restore you 1 hit point.  During combat every three 
    rounds it will heal you 1 hit point.  This NEVER runs out.
    
    Rings of Regeneration #2, this one serves as a Food Source as well as 
    a healer.  The charges represent how many foods it is worth.  Handy 
    for getting beyond the 99 food limit.  When it runs out of charges it 
    becomes a normal Ring of Regeneration.
    
    Ring of X-Ray Vision:  This rings will allow you to peep through a 
    door to see what monsters lurk inside.
    
    Feather Falling:  The cheapest of the rings, this helps you avoid all 
    falling traps such as pits.
    
    Water Walking:  Longest this thing has charges you are exempt from the 
    25 point movement cost of walking in water.  Once out of charges it 
    becomes worthless.  Its use is automatic.  It is NOT used in dungeons 
    though, onyl outdoors.
    
    Wall Remover:  This will remove a section of wall in a dungeon.  It 
    will make it a blank space.  This is dangerous to use with 1 charge, 
    since you may get locked out.  If and when you quit or exit off the 
    current map the "eradicated" wall returns back to normal!  So in other 
    words, whenever you see "Loading/Dencrypting....." you know that the 
    wall that was removed is now replaced!  Also be careful that you don't 
    exit off a map unto a non-existant map.  No means of protection have 
    been installed into the game.  If you do walk off the map you will be 
    dropped back to the BBS without saving your character with an I/O 
    error!  You are warned.
    
    Wall Remover 2 has more charges than Wall Remover #1.
                                   Page -11-
    Teleportation:  This is also a VERY dangerous ring.  Its intended use 
    is for you to use it to get from one side of a map to another.  For 
    instance, if you know the x,y location of the city in the northern 
    part of a map and you are on the southern, far far away, cast it and 
    you will be there.  
    
    By using this ring you could tecnically travel all around the world 
    quite easily, but you may never get back on to the continent.  Walking 
    off an undefined dungeon map or wilderness map will dump you back to 
    the BBS with an I/O error, with NO save.  Be careful with this ring!
    You are WARNED!!!
    
    Ground Level:  This handy ring will return you back to the outdoor 
    portion of the game from ANY dungeon!  So if you are 6 levels up or 
    down and not wish to walk back through it, use it!  Once used it 
    becomes worthless.  A great Time saver!
    
    Magic Resistance, will absorb 255 points of damage before becoming 
    useless.  It will only absorb magic spells.
    
                                     Tavern
    
    By purchasing a drink you may here a rumor, most of the time they are 
    false.  Prices of liquor depends upon the expensiveness of the town 
    and your Personality.  No age limit!
    
    Gambling is allowed here, you can either play dice or slots.  Fairly 
    self explanatory.  Basically good for getting a lot of extra cash to 
    start the game with.  Otherwise the chances of winning are rather poor 
    here. 
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
                                   Page -12-
                              Your Guardian Angel
    
    Hit 'Y' to see what either myself or Lukas has to say to you!  Often 
    times we will tell you generally what you will need to go places or 
    suggestions as to who to talk to.  Since it is kind of difficult to 
    add a clothe or paper map into an onliner we decided this feature was 
    to substitute.  Also you get to meet our personalities somewhat 
    through this feature.
    
    
                               Char Function 'Z'
    
    This will allow you to quit without saving, erase your character so 
    you can start over (or just plain quit and save the sysop some room on 
    his drive).  All inputs are permanent here so choose wisely.
    
    
    
                                  Outdoor Inns
    
    Throughout the continent you will find inns that will allow to rest 
    quite safely and comfortable... for a cost.  All your spell points and 
    hit points will be restored at no movement loss!
    
    Also inns will sell you an automap of the current wilderness area you 
    are in, VERY handy for finding out where dungeons are without having 
    to explore vast areas.
    
    These are flashing 'I's.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
                                   Page -13-
                                  C O M B A T
    
    Combat, ah.. everybody's favorite part.  Okay here are the rules:
    
    '1234' attacks a certain monster
    'F'    uses a combat ring (only)
    'M'    switches the monsters to/from missile or melee. 
    'P'    passes your turn
    'R'    Retreat
    'S'    use staff
    'T'    Turn Undead
    'U'    Use Potion (any)
    'Z'    Only in Beta versions, drops you back to the BBS without a 
    save.  Used in emergencies, bugs, or to cheat.
    
    Hps :  current hitpoints of your character
    MPS :  Magic Points of your character
    AC  :  armor class of your character
    
    Monster Stats:
    #X  :  Monster ID number, used to identify who you wish to attack
    NAME:  Name of Monster
    HPS :  Current Hitpoints of the monster.
    MPS :  Magic Points of the Current Monster.
    AC  :  armor class of the monster.
    MEL :  highlighted with a '*' if in Melee combat
    MIS :  highlighted with a '*' if in Missile range.
    
                              Attacking a Monster
    
    To attack a monster hit the number of their location.  The program 
    automatically determines which weapon you will use.  If the monster in 
    question is in melee combat it will use your melee weapon to attack 
    it.  If the monster is in melee it will use your missile weapon. 
    
    Missile Combat:  Missile combat is dependent upon your character's CRD 
    (coordination skill) as well as the magical bonus of his/her missile 
    weapon.  Damage is determined by weapon type and magical bonus.
    
    Melee Combat:  Melee combat is dependent upon your character's STR 
    (strength skill) as well as the magical bonus of his/her melee weapon.
    
                                   Fire Ring
    
    A fire Ring will effect all monsters and is soley dependent upon the 
    damage of the ring and whether or not a monster makes its saving 
    throw.
    
                                      Pass
    This will pass your turn over completely.  Use it if you feel a need 
    to.
    
                                   Page -14-
                                    Retreat
    
    Retreating is often times a last resort but a VERY necessary one.  
    Often times you will be setup against some powerful monsters.  You 
    will only loose 10-20% of your gold if you retreat.  You will also not 
    be allowed regain lost hit points.
    
    If the monsters haven't had their turn yet (meaning you got first 
    attack and retreated), the monsters are allowed their parting blows, 
    which could kill you.
    
                                     Staff
    
    For elves and magic users here is a chance for them to use their 
    staves in battle.  The chance of successfully launching a spell is 
    dependent upon your level and intelligence.  
    
    Spells effect all living monsters.
    
                                 Turn Undead  
    
    Priests are able to turn undead beasts.  They can only do this once 
    per combat is determine by their WIS (Wisdom skill) and thier level.  
    Some monsters are harder to turn then others..... though.  Monsters 
    such as Skeletons, Zombies etc are Undead (they were dead and are back 
    alive) regenerating Trolls are not Undead.
    
                                   Use Potion
    
    This allows you to use a potion in combat.   Try to use it BEFORE 
    combat for the best results.
    
                                 Missile/Melee
    
    When you use this command you will be prompted with:  
    "1. Melee 2. Missile: ",
    
    hit the appropriate number.  Depending upon your CRD (coordination 
    skill) you can put all the monsters into the desired combat mode.  
    Highly useful for characters without missile weapons or avoiding 
    monsters without missile weapons.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
                                   Page -15-
    Final strategies:
    
    1)  Don't be afraid to use potions, people rarely use them but they 
    are handy for dealing out extra damage.
    
    2)  Purchase a decent ring as soon as possible.
    
    3)  Purchase magic weapons at towns.  Depending upon a town's 
    "magicalness" or "richness" a town will offer enchanted weapons.
    
    4)  By God, write down those dungeons words and keep a rough log of 
    what you are doing in the game.  Don't become mixed up between two 
    playings on two different boards.
    
    5)  Talk to people and read 'Y'our guardian angel stuff in the 
    cities.  Watch for tricky ways that people say things.  Often times 
    keywords are in their description or their greetings, or even their 
    goodbyes.
    
    6)  Explore those dungeons and explore those rooms; unlike in Pit 
    Fiend Volume I, rooms are now walk throughable.
    
    7)  Post clues to your friends and help each other out!  The game is 
    heavy duty and often times two heads are better than one.
    
    8)  Explore carefully, look for treasures and even print out dungeons 
    from your auto-maps.  They are not saved!
    
    9)  Nobody in the game is a worthless person to talk to... they ALL 
    offer suggestions and advice in some way or another (with the possible 
    exceptions of the McClouds in the first town....)
    
    10)  Trolls are not intended for low level characters.  I have seen 
    WAY To many of the beginning players move onto the bridges and try to 
    fight trolls.  You will LOOSE!  Take the hard way until you are 
    roughly 4th level or so.
    
    11)  Ask your sysop to allow you to download your character.  If 
    another sysop is willing upload it to him.  Unlike in Pit Fiend I, 
    characters can be freely copied without damage to the *.DAT files.  
    Some sysops have installed the COPYCHAR.COM file and READCHAR.COM 
    files which allow you to upload a char, copy him to the game, play the 
    game, and copy him back for you to download.  Some sysops may not want 
    to do this though.  Each File is 588 bytes long.
    
    When and if you upload your character you MUST rename it.... meaning 
    that for instance if you are user number 23 on one board and 78 on 
    another you must name your character 23.SAV  or 78.SAV depending upon 
    the board you call.
    
                                   Page -17-
    Notices:  All identities in the game are used with permission.  Any 
    identities similiar to yourself or another person living or dead is 
    purely coincidental.  Many places are taken from California and in 
    many cases do NOT represent the actual places themselves... with the 
    exception of Ladera Linda, Angel's Gate (levels one and two), ....
    
    Copyright (C) by Eddie Gaul 1990 all rights reserved.
    
    If you find a bug with this game let me know....  I have developed 
    special software to catch bugs in the datafile, but sometimes a bug 
    will develop.  If its unavoidable I will correct the mistake.  If it 
    is avoidable I may release an upgrade or something like that.  But 
    basically it is up to you to contact me.  Often times bugs occur when 
    people tinker with the files, avoid this temptation.  Also use the 
    Viewchr2 minimally.  This is not a toy but merely a utility to correct 
    perhaps a weak person who has gotten terrible rolls on their hit 
    points or something like that.  
    
    Again my address where you can reach me by US mail is:
    
       Eddie Gaul
       2917 Via Rivera
       Palos Verdes, CA 90274.
    
    Again I do say I will NOT return any long distance phone calls and I 
    do request that you do NOT call me.  I am rarily home and my folks 
    don't like getting great amounts of calls for someone who isn't home 
    that much, so please WRITE me if you encounter a bug or a question.  
    Or you can contact me through the NET, I can usually be found posting 
    on the Onliner WWIV NET.
    
    Adios and we shall see if there is a Pit Fiend's Adventure Volume 3.
    
    Later.
    
